Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger, and today we're
going to talk about arithmetic with fractions,
basically the operations of addition
and multiplication. So, in this series
on foundations of mathematics, we have so far
introduced the natural numbers starting from 1,
2, 3, and so on, and now we've introduced
fractions. A fraction is an ordered pair (M,
N) written M/N or M over N where M and N
are just natural numbers. We'll introduce
this notation for that statement: so MN
being natural numbers, we'll write it as
"MN are natural numbers." This symbol stands for
"are" or "is." It's like a European Euro sign,
resembling an element sign, except it extends
a little bit beyond to distinguish it from
that. And "num" here does not represent
a set but rather a mathematical type.
In this foundational series, we are not going
to talk about infinite sets because infinite
sets don't really exist, and we are going
to adopt the rather more historical point of
view that something like the natural numbers
is a sequence that unfolds beyond our view,
but that we have no right to claim that we can
grab all of them and put them all together in
a single collection or a single set. So this is
not a statement about set theory; it's a statement
about mathematical objects being of a certain
type. We'll say a lot more about that later on.
I also remind you that fractions come with an
important notion of equality, that M/N is equal
to K/L precisely when M * L = N * K. Now, when we
establish a notion of equality like this, there's
an important logical step that we should make
sure about, and that is, suppose that M/N = K/L
and suppose that K/L also equals P/Q. Does it
then follow that M/N equals P/Q? We certainly
want it to be true, and we must check that our
notion of equality has this transitive property.
So let's do that. This first statement here is the
same as ML = NK, and the second statement is the
same as KQ = LP. If we take these two and multiply
them together, so we take ML multiplied by KQ,
that's going to be equal to NK multiplied by
LP, which we've written here. Now we examine
this and rearrange it using the associative
and commutative laws for multiplication. So
we take this M and Q and bring them together
and the L and the K together. Over here,
we bring the N and the P together and the L and
the K together. Then we see that we have a certain
multiple of LK equals another multiple of LK, and
so that multiple MQ has to equal that multiple NP,
and that's equivalent to what we wanted to show.
So we've used a basic fact that's worth pointing
out. We've used this fact before on occasion: if
AB equals AC, then we can deduce that B equals
C. So a multiple of A equals another multiple of
A means those two multiples have to be the same.
Now that we have fractions, we have to define
what we mean by the sum of two fractions and
the product of two fractions. To define those
things, we're going to go back to our laws
for the division of natural numbers. I remind
you that A/B + C/D can be rewritten using the
laws for division that we've established. We
rewrite AB as A * D / B * D, and we rewrite
C/D as B * C / B * D. The reason why we do that
is that now the denominators here are equal,
and when the denominators are equal, we can add
the two divisions by just adding the numerators:
so AD + BC / BD. That was a law for divisions of
natural numbers. For multiplication, A/B * C/D =
A * C / B * D. That was another law for divisions
of natural numbers. So we're going to use those
two to define the corresponding operations for
fractions. We're going to say that A/B + C/D
equals, by definition, A * D + B * C over BD. So
exactly the same expression that occurred there.
We're going to say that A/B * C/D is AC over BD,
For example, 2/3 + 5/4 is 2 * 4 + 3 * 5,
all of that over 3 * 4, and that's 8 + 15,
that's 23 over 12. While the product 2/3 * 5/4
is 2 * 5 over 3 * 4, 10 over 12. Now, although
this could be reduced or replaced with 5/6,
there's no need to; it's correct as it stands.
Now that we've defined the operations of addition
and multiplication, we must check that they
are well-defined. That means we have to check
that our notion of equality behaves well with
respect to addition and multiplication, or more
precisely, that if A/B = A'/B' and C/D = C'/D',
then we must check that the sum of these two
equals the sum of these two. In other words,
that AD + BC over BD, which is the sum of
these two, equals A'D' + B'C' over B'D',
which is the sum of those two. We also have
to do the same thing for multiplication.
What does it mean for these two to be equal? It
means that this times this equals this times this,
and I've written that out. What does it mean for
these two to be equal? It means that those two
are equal. Our problem is to go from this
and this (those are the assumptions) to
proving this one. This is a very important
logical step when dealing with fractions,
and there's no avoiding it. I'm afraid
that many undergraduates and graduate
students have gone through their entire
mathematical careers without having made
this kind of check, so here's a
good point to remedy these gaps.
Alright, so the answer, of course, is yes. How
do we do it? We take these two initial starting
points and manipulate them. So we take this one
here and multiply both sides by DD', the product
D * D'. So there's AB' * DD', and then that
equals B * A' * DD'. We do the same kind of thing
with this one here. We multiply this one on the
left by BB'. So we have that times CD', and that
times DC'. Those we know from our assumptions.
Now what we're going to do is add this thing,
the left side here, to the left side here, and
that's going to be equal to the right side here
plus the right side here. So I'm just taking this
plus this, writing it there, and this plus this,
writing it there. Now we stare at this and
rewrite it a little bit. So A'DD' we rewrite as
A * D * B'D'. We rearrange it similarly, rearrange
that and that one and that one. Once we've done it
that way, we see there's a common factor B'D'
here, and the distributive law allows us to
rewrite the left-hand side as AD + BC all times
B'D'. This side here can be rewritten in the same
way as BD times this quantity, and then that's
exactly what we wanted to show here. So we've gone
from the assumptions to what we wanted to show.
Notice we haven't used subtraction yet, which we
haven't defined. I'll leave the multiplication
check of well-definedness to you as an exercise.
Now that we have the definitions
of addition and multiplication,
we need to check that the laws of arithmetic
hold for these operations. It turns out that
the laws of arithmetic are exactly the same
ones as we've already established for natural
numbers. It's going to be an important task
to check that they're actually valid. We'll
do that next time. I hope you'll join me.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.